What success generally looks like on research projects with me
Ethan Perez Sep 2, 2023 Shared Externally

Below, I’ve included specific criteria that strong collaborators of mine tend to meet, with rough weightings on the importance, as a rough north star for people who collaborate with me (especially if you’re new to research). These criteria are for the specific kind of research I do (highly experimental LLM alignment research, excluding interpretability). The exact weighting will also vary heavily depending on what role you’re serving on the team/project. E.g., I’d probably upweight criteria where you’re differentially strong or differentially contributing on the team, since I generally guide people towards working on things that line up with their skills. For more junior collaborators (e.g., first time doing a research project, where I’ve scoped out the project), this means I generally weigh execution-focused criteria more than direction-setting criteria (since here I’m often the person doing the direction setting). Also, some of the criteria as outlined below are a really high bar, and e.g. I only recently started to meet them myself after 5 years of doing research and/or I don’t meet other criteria myself. This is mainly written to be a north star for targets to aim for. That said, I think most people can get to a good-to-great spot on these criteria with 6-18 months of trying, and I don’t currently think that many of these criteria are particularly talent/brains bottlenecked vs. just doing a lot of deliberate practice and working to get better on these criteria (I was actively bad at some of the criteria below like implementation speed even ~6 months into me doing research, but improved a lot since then with practice). With that context, here are the rough success criteria I’d outline:
[70%] Getting ideas to work quickly
[45%] Implementation speed
Able to quickly implement a well-scoped idea. An example of doing really well here is if we talk about an idea one day and decide it’s exciting/worth doing, and you tell me the next day whether it worked
Able to run a high volume of experiments. You’re doing really well here if it’s hard for your supervisor to keep up with the volume of the experiments/results you’re showing; 30m or even 60m weekly 1:1 meetings should feel like not long enough to discuss all of the results you have, and you have to filter what we discuss in our weekly meetings to just the most important and decision-relevant results. If some experiments take a while to run, you’re running a lot of other project-relevant experiments in parallel or implementing the next experiment (Exceptions: the experiments you’re running take more than overnight to run and there’s no way to design them to be shorter; or the experiments are very implementation-heavy)
Able to design a minimal experiment to test a mid/high-level idea. You run experiments in a way s.t. you’re rarely compute or experiment-time bottlenecked (esp. early in a project), and your experiments are designed to be easy/quick to implement
You trade off code quality and implementation speed in the best way for long-run productivity. You bias heavily towards speed in general, except when you notice the project is significantly slowed down by a lack of code quality / good tooling, in which case you’re able to speed up the project by making relevant code improvements
Noticing when you’re going slowly and quickly and shamelessly asking for help
[25%] Ability to get things to work:
Things “just work” when you implement them and run them. If you’re maximizing a number, that number goes up. After iterating, your method is the SOTA method.
You suggest and choose good next steps fairly independently in between weekly meetings. If we don’t chat between weekly meetings, I’d strongly endorse the decisions you made throughout the week, around what things to try. You’ll have tried great ideas that I hadn’t thought of, because you’re spending more time thinking about the problem and looking at results.
You diagnose why something’s not working and make fixes to get things to work
You’re able to get ideas working that other people couldn’t, by being effective at coming up with good ideas for quick things to try, predicting which ones will work, and/or trying lots of ideas
[20%] Driving the project direction
[10%] Medium/low-level, day-to-day direction
Knowing/determining well-motivated research questions are important to answer, and prioritizing/designing experiments to answer those questions
Making good decisions about what approach to take, evaluation metrics, etc. Running the right version of an experiment the first time
Effective at working independently, e.g., 1h/week meeting + Slack DMs/tags are sufficient to keep you on track and ensure you’re doing maximally valuable stuff
Noticing when you’re not sure you’re tackling the most important research questions or not sure about the next step and quickly asking for help
In our weekly meetings, you proactively propose/suggest great next steps for what we should do the next week, with a good prioritization of those steps. The next steps you propose are better than what I’d suggest, and I basically just give you a thumbs up each week, or fairly minor feedback.
[10%] High-level/conceptual direction
Able to independently determine what research directions are important to pursue, either by (1) proactively sourcing ideas from others (including those not on our project) and filtering them for quality/tractability, or (2) figuring out what seems important based on your own ideas/reading/experiments.
Noticing when we could probably answer a more important research question or when we’re somewhat lost in direction, then taking the initiative to deconfuse us and e.g. write a doc, lead a discussion, have a 1:1 chat with other team members, or organize a meeting with external discussion to unblock us
You’re able to spot great project ideas, and (even better) “just got for it,” try it out without asking, and show a working prototype, effectively derisking new ideas/directions on your own.
[5%] Communicating ideas clearly
Your slack messages/plots and live presentations/discussions of results are clear and easy to understand. It takes very little time to process information you send over Slack, and a minimal number of back and forths to understand the results (separate from discussing their implications). You find that I and other project supervisors are giving helpful or very helpful feedback during our weekly meetings.
[5%] Other – Varies by person, but includes things like:
You’re a great teammate, e.g. helping others out where you notice good opportunities, taking initiative to improve things that you see could be improved, do what needs to get done on the project even if the work isn’t as exciting
You’re helping us find/recruit great candidates for our team
You’re easy to manage. Not necessarily in terms of time needed but along other axes: how receptive you are to feedback, how much emotional energy you add vs. require from members of the team/me in our interactions, whether you’re transparent/communicative about issues you’re facing, whether we have a high trust relationship where it’s easy to discuss various topics
You’re great at noticing and calling out room for improvement, e.g. in how we’re working together, things I could be doing better, ways our team could be coordinating better